### 1. The derived SI unit of power is [1]
* (A) m kg s–2 
* (B) m–2 kg s–3
* (C) m2 kg s–3 
* (D) m2 kg s–2
### 2. 5.0 × 1018 m can also be expressed as [1]
* (A) 5.0 Zm 
* (B) 5.0 Em
* (C) 5.0 am 
* (D) 5.0 ym
### 3. Which of the following is not a homogeneous mixture? [1]
* (A) Tincture iodine 
* (B) Soda water
* (C) Brass 
* (D) Milk
### 4. Read the following statements carefully and select the group of incorrect statements about an atom? [1]
* (i) Atoms can exist independently in free state.
* (ii) Atoms are the basic units from which molecules and ions are formed.
* (iii) Some atoms are not neutral in nature.
* (iv) Atoms aggregate in large numbers to form the matter that we can see, feel or touch.
* (A) (i) and (ii) 
* (B) (i) and (iii)
* (C) (ii) and (iii) 
* (D) (i) and (iv)
### 5. A mango falls from a tree due to gravitational attraction between earth and mango. If Fe is the magnitude of force exerted by the earth on the mango and Fm is the magnitude of the force exerted by the mango on the earth, then _____. [1]
* (A) Fe is very much greater than Fm.
* (B) Fm is very much greater than Fe.
* (C) Fe is only a little greater than Fm.
* (D) Fe and Fm are equal.
### 6. A body is falling from a height of 100m. After it has fallen through a distance of 25m from the top, it will possess _____. [1]
* (A) only potential energy
* (B) half potential and half kinetic energy
* (C) more potential and less kinetic energy
* (D) more kinetic and less potential energy
### 7. Involuntary actions in the body are controlled by medulla through [1]
* (A) fore brain 
* (B) mid-brain
* (C) hind-brain 
* (D) spinal cord
### 8. Which of the following oxide of nitrogen is neutral? [1]
* (A) N2O 
* (B) N2O3
* (C) N2O4 
* (D) NO2
### 9. Which of the following arrangement of metals shows the correct decreasing order of their reactivity? [1]
* (A) (B) (C) (D)
### 10. State the SI units used while measuring [2]
* (i) electric current while flowing through a heater.
* (ii) temperature of a furnace.
* (iii) length of a hockey play ground.
* (iv) amount of substance.
### 11. Balance the following chemical equations and identify the type of chemical reaction. [2]
### 12. The given velocity-time graph shows the motion of a cyclist. Find (i) its acceleration (ii) its velocity and (iii) the distance covered by the cyclist in 16 seconds. [2]
### 13. In the given figure of a plant cell, name the parts labelled as [2]
* (i) a, (ii) b, (iii) c and/Am¡a (iv) d
### 14. Define relative humidity. Name the instrument used to measure relative humidity. Is it necessary to measure the temperature also while measuring the relative humidity? [2]
### 15. State the mode of transmission of dengue fever. Mention its any three symptoms.
[2]
### 16. Name the scale on which the intensity of an earthquake is measured. Suggest any three preventive measures which may be adopted in the event of an earthquake. [2]
### 17. Draw the diagram of respiratory system in human beings and label the following parts : [4]
* (a) Glottis
* (b) Trachea
* (c) Lungs
* (d) Bronchioles
### 18. What is meant by atomic number and mass number of an atom? Two atoms X and Y are denoted as follows. Find out the atomic number and valency of X and Y. [4]
* (i) 20 10X 
* (ii) 27 13 Y
### 19. For making cake, we use baking powder. If we use baking soda instead of baking powder in cake [4]
* (i) how will it affect the taste of the cake and why?
* (ii) how can baking soda be converted into baking powder? Give two other uses of baking soda.
### 20. Explain the process of covalent bond formation with the help of an example. Identify the covalent bonds present in the following molecules : [4]
* (i) N2 
* (ii) Cl2
* (iii) O2 
* (iv) HCl
### 21. Water sprinkler used for grass lawns begins to rotate as soon as the water is supplied. Name and state the law of motion on which it works. State three significant features of this law. [4]
### 22. (i) Draw ray diagrams showing the image formation by a convex lens when an object is placed -
* (a) between optical centre and focus of the lens.
* (b) at twice the focal length of the lens.
* (ii) An object is placed perpendicular to the principal axis of a convex lens of focal length 15 cm. The distance of the object from the lens is 20 cm. Find the nature and position of the image.

### 23. (i) Derive a relation for the equivalent resistance of three resistors connected in parallel.
* (ii) Three resistors of resistances 10Ω, 15Ω and 30Ω respectively are connected in parallel to a battery of 12V. Calculate
* (a) the total circuit resistance and
* (b) the current through the resistor of resistance 10Ω. 
### 24. What is meant by genetic disorders? Name the type of chromosome on which defective genes causing haemophilia and colour-blindness are located. Why is haemophilia and colour-blindness found mostly in boys and not in girls? Explain.

### 25. With the help of neat labelled diagrams explain the asexual reproduction in the following organisms :
* (a) Binary fission in amoeba.
* (b) Budding in hydra.
### 26. What is meant by an ecosystem? Taking the example of a pond explain the terms abiotic and biotic components of the ecosystem.
### 27. How is compost different from vermicompost? How will you make vermicompost for your school garden?
