### 1. Which one of the following is not a sign of good mental health?
* (A) Control over emotions
* (B) Pleasant personality
* (C) Balanced feelings and desires
* (D) Ability to accept the realities of life and face them

### 2. After taking our bath we generally use a cotton towel to soak water on our body. The towel soaks the water from our body because of
* (A) fluidity of water
* (B) capillary action of water
* (C) polar nature of water
* (D) high density of water as compared to cotton cloth

### 3. An artist uses lead pencil for making sketches. The lead in the pencil is in fact
* (A) Lead 
* (B) Charcoal
* (C) Carbon black 
* (D) Graphite

### 4. Which of the following statements is not true in respect of Dalton’s atomic theory?
* (A) Matter consists of tiny indivisible atoms.
* (B) Atoms are indestructible.
* (C) Different chemical elements have different kinds of atoms.
* (D) Atoms lose their identity in chemical reactions.

### 5. When a dust storm comes suddenly, our eyes are closed involuntarily. This reaction is controlled by:
* (A) Medulla Oblongata 
* (B) Spinal Cord
* (C) Cerebellum 
* (D) Cerebrum

### 6. The main cause for the deterioration of white marble of famous monument ‘Taj Mahal’ is:
* (A) Ageing of the marble 
* (B) Dust in the environment
* (C) Acid rain 
* (D) Green house gases

### 7. The figure below shows displacement versus position graph of a wave emitted by a source at ‘0’ in 3s. The velocity of the wave is:
* (A) 3 ms–1 
* (B) 2 ms–1
* (C) 1.5 ms–1 
* (D) 6 ms–1

### 8. We daily brush our teeth using a tooth paste. The nature of tooth paste is generally:
* (A) Acidic 
* (B) Alkaline
* (C) Corrosive 
* (D) Neutral

### 9. The main aim of a tailor for oiling his sewing machine is to
* (A) protect its parts from dust and moisture.
* (B) protect its parts from rusting.
* (C) reduce friction among its parts.
* (D) absorption of heat produced during motion of its parts by the oil.

### 10. The curd is said to contain bacteria good for human health. To which kingdom of life these bacteria belong ? Write two characteristic features of these bacteria. 
### 11. Differentiate between ‘Emulsion’ and ‘Aerosol’. Give one example of each. 
### 12. Why does ice at 0°C cool our drinks more effectively than water at 0°C ? Explain.
### 13. Differentiate between ‘Emigration’ and ‘Immigration’. What is their role on the size of the local population?
### 14. Why does a paratrooper use a parachute to descend slowly after jumping from a height ? Explain.
### 15. Draw a ray diagram to show that a convex lens can act as a magnifier for object lying between its focus and optical centre.
### 16. Why is ‘hypertension’ considered a disorder related to circulatory system ? Write any two of its symptoms.
### 17. (a) Classify the following under base unit and derived unit :
* (i) m–1 and (ii) s–1
* Which physical quantities do these units belong to ?
### 17. (b) Derive SI unit of pressure in terms of base units. 2 + 2
### 18. A person is suffering from low grade fever, cough, blood in sputum, weight loss, chest pain and excessive fatigue for more than 25 days.
* (a) Identify the disease he is possibly suffering from.
* (b) What is the cause of the disease ?
* (c) Is the disease communicable or non-communicable ?
* (d) What precautions should be taken to prevent the disease ?
### 19. (a) Identify the organic compounds described below and draw their structures :
* (i) The organic compound which is used to preserve biological specimens in laboratories.
* (ii) The organic compound which is used to ripen the fruits such as banana and mango.
### 19. (b) Name the organic acids present in (i) Vitamin C and (ii) Citrus fruits
### 20. Draw Transverse Section (TS) of a bisexual flower. Identify and label the parts having the following description on it :
* (i) the part which carries ovules or female sex cells
* (ii) the part which bears pollen
* (iii) the female part from where pollen enter for fertilization
### 21. (a) Can a body moving with constant speed still have acceleration ? Explain with the help of an example.
### 21. (b) Explain the concept of ‘action’ and ‘reaction’ in Newton’s third law of motion with the help of an example. Can ‘action’ and ‘reaction’ act on same body ? Give reason for your answer.
### 22. (a) An electric iron has markings 220 V – 50 Hz and 1 kW on it. Explain the significance of these markings. Can this electric iron be used both on AC and DC ? Give reason.
### 22. (b) Calculate the resistance of the heating element of this electric iron
### 23. Why are metals electropositive and non-metals electronegative in nature ? Name one ore of zinc metal. Describe the process of obtaining zinc from this ore with the help of chemical equations of the reactions involved in this process.
### 24. Differentiate between mixed cropping and multiple cropping. Why is mixed cropping and multiple cropping considered better from the perspective of food security ? 4
### 25. What is ‘Redox reaction’ ? Explain redox reaction in terms of electron transfer with the help of an example. Also explain what are oxidizing and reducing agents. 4
### 26. (a) What is chemical name of baking soda ? Write its chemical formula. Name the raw material required to manufacture baking soda. 
### 26. (b) What is baking powder ? Why is it used in the preparation of cakes ? Explain.
### 27. (a) An element ‘A’ has atomic number 12 and element ‘B’ has atomic number 8. What type of bond they will form ? Give reason for your answer. 
### 27. (b) Explain the property of the compound formed by elements A and B with respect to its electrical conductivity.
### 28. (a) What are genes ? State their chemical nature. Name the genes acquired by a child with blood group ‘O’ from his parent. 
### 28. (b) What is genetic disorder ? Name two genetic disorders and write their symptoms. 
### 28. (c) Why is colour-blindness found mostly in boys ? Explain.
### 29. (a) State the principle of working of a generator. Draw a labelled diagram of D.C. generator. 
### 29. (b) What changes should be made in the structure of D.C. generator to increase the strength of current generated by it ? 
### 29. (c) Why do we mention frequency of alternating current but not that of direct current ?
### 30. (a) State the postulates of Bohr’s model of atom. How does this model of atom explain the stability of atom ?
### 30. (b) Explain the difference between Bohr circular orbit and energy shells of an atom.
### 30. (c) The atomic number of an element ‘A’ is 10. Distribute the number of electrons in its different energy shells and find its valency. Will element ‘A’ react with other elements ? Give reasons for your answer.
