### 1. Classical thinkers believed that Economics is : [1]
(A) the science of wealth (B) the science of development
(C) the science of consumption (D) the science of competition
### 2. Production activities require : [1]
(A) Skilled labour (B) Unskilled labour
(C) (A) and (B) Both (D) None of these
### 3. The oldest form of economy is : [1]
(A) the socialist economy
(B) the capitalist economy
(C) the mixed economy
(D) the centrally planned economy
### 4. The price at which quantity demanded of a commodity is equal to its quantity supplied is called : [1]
(A) the equilibrium price (B) the supply price
(C) the demand price (D) the fixed price
### 5. In the study of economics mostly these informations are used for analysis : [1]
(A) qualitative (B) quantitative
(C) qualitative and quantitative both (D) imaginary
### 6. For production of goods and services these resources are required : [1]
(A) man-made (B) natural
(C) man-made and natural both (D) imported
### 7. The environment includes these factors : [1]
(A) biotic factors (B) abiotic factors
(C) biotic and abiotic factors both (D) none of these
### 8. The institute that conducts the quality testing of many consumer goods is : [1]
(A) Indian Statistical Institute (B) Industrial Training Institute
(C) Indian Institute of Technology (D) Indian Standard Institute
### 9. What is meant by an economy? [2]
### 10. What is the relationship between price of a commodity and its demand? [2]
### 11. Explain barter system with an example. [2]
### 12. Define supply. State the law of supply. [2]
### 13. Fair price shops are for help to poor people. Explain. [2]
### 14. Explain qualitative information and quantitative information with example. [2]
### 15. Goods and services both are important to satisfy human wants. Explain giving example from your daily life. [2]
### 16. Calculate total revenue of a shopkeeper Sanjay on the basis of following transactions : [2]
- He sold 80 kg wheat at the rate of Rs. 30.00 per kg.
- He sold 50 kg rice at the rate of Rs. 60.00 per kg.
- He sold 50 litre oil at the rate of Rs. 110.00 per litre.
### 17. Suppose you have opened a Savings Bank Account in your name in a post office. Explain the process you have undergone for opening the Savings Bank Account. [2]
### 18. Suppose there is inflation on account of some specific food items your family consumes. What one possible step will you take without reducing the total quantity of food consumed to fight the inflation? [2]
### 19. Explain the importance of data in Economic planning. [4]
### 20. How does the Government play major role in controlling prices. [4]
### 21. With the advance of human civilisation a lot of environmental problems have
cropped up. Explain. [4]
### 22. Explain following characteristics of wants. [4]
(A) Present wants are more important than future wants.
(B) Wants change and expand with development.
### 23. Describe following characteristics of a capitalist economy. [4]
(A) Private property
(B) Freedom of enterprise
### 24. Now-a-days online shopping has become popular with the growth of technology.
Explain. [4]
### 25. Differentiate between diagrammatic and graphic presentation of data in Economics.
[4]
### 26. Describe the production activities included in secondary sector of our economy.
[4]
### 27. What are the sources of air pollution? [4]
### 28. Explain the following rights of consumers. [4]
(A) Right to safety
(B) Right to be heard
### 29. Following are the marks obtained by a group of 60 students in Economics.
Calculate arithmetic mean by using short-cut method. [4]
Marks 0-20 20-40 40-60 60-80 80-100
No. of students 4 6 15 20 15
### 30. What were the reasons for occurrence of famines in India during British rule? [4]
### 31. Explain the importance of firms and industries. [6]
### 32. What factors influence the seller in fixing the price of a commodity? [6]
### 33. Describe primary functions of a Bank. [6]
### 34. Explain the reasons for poverty.
